00:00:01 - 00:01:12
All right. Yeah. Hi everyone. Uh I'm Tanya Bogajage. Happy to be here. Happy I made it just in time for the first talk. Very interesting. Um so I'm going to be talking about indexes are not all you need. And the idea of this talk is a little little bit to explore ways to look into duct pitfalls and yeah finding them and seeing what to do from there. So maybe a little bit of background on me. I did study computer science in Germany. Um moved to Amsterdam my first time for an internship at CWI. Met some

00:00:36 - 00:01:44
amazing data database folks there. Um and eventually after my masters came back to work at DuckDB Labs because it was by then like a company. Um yeah, that's me. And now let's yeah jump right in. So DDB pitfalls and how to find them. I feel like that's a bit of a big promise I am having in that title. like am I going to give you the magic formula to find out why your queries are slow and fix it? Um, sadly I won't be able to do that, but I'm at least going to try to give some starting points on looking

00:01:10 - 00:02:20
into slow queries and what DUTDB offers that like might help figuring out the cause. Um, so by default, DuckDB does already try to choose sensible defaults like preconfigured values. You can check them out in the documentation. So I think it's not as easy to get into a slow query hopefully. And also sadly on the other hand that means once you have a slow query getting it to be fast can be a bit tricky because DDB isn't designed to be like super super tunable like some other systems um to match

00:01:46 - 00:02:51
exactly your use case. M maybe you will be able to but yeah and to look into ways to yeah analyze your query performance. We're going to be using indexes as a case study which is something I've worked a lot on and which I feel is one of these things you can either really gain something from or lose a lot of performance from. So we will be looking at some profiling and we're going to be also looking at uh one function to monitor database memory. Yep. So um maybe just a little bit of a step back because we're going

00:02:18 - 00:03:28
to be talking about indexes specifically treebased indexes. So it won't be about for example zone maps which like minmax statistics and stuff. So this is like what B like a B tree would be like a perfect example of an treebased index and database systems. So um historically if we think about the traditional database systems and they're very transactional workloads we kind of maybe understand that indexes are very inherent to that because these like systems like think of a web shop for example you have like a series of point

00:02:53 - 00:03:59
lookups you're doing like uh updates on a single tupil it's all very pointy so that uh is one thing h where indexes of course are very nice because we can very quickly jump to that place in our data and find it. Um the second thing is in these traditional systems we have like a fixed set of queries which means we know exactly what we want to be fast and we can then fine-tune our systems. I mean if you think about Oracle they're basically building their whole business model around consulting on how to get

00:03:25 - 00:04:29
the system fast for your workload. So um that's a bit of the history here. But now the question is what about indexes in if you look at analytical workloads and initially that was very counterintuitive because we're no longer looking at point lookups for example instead we want to be fast with like table scans big table scans and we want to compute very complex aggregations and so the focus was really this efficient scan performance and indexes kind of fell short there. uh many systems in the beginning actually said

00:03:58 - 00:05:03
oh we don't need that we don't support that some still do not support indexes uh tree based indexes um and also we're now looking at a lot in the previous presentation we're looking at a talk queries someone is going to be customizing clicking together their queries so maybe we're not even sure what would we even be indexing here to gain any performance boost um so then of course that raises the question where do we still see and use indexes if we now just made a point of they're no longer

00:04:29 - 00:05:35
useful. Well, so even analytical systems they're not like this complete standalone thing. They come from often the data comes from a different system and maybe integrity constraints still have to hold. Maybe I do need to give some guarantees on my data when I'm analyzing it. And also um we talked about scans a lot but we also see a lot of filters everywhere like this uh yeah the typical give me exactly the value 500 and then join it to something else all the the rows matching that value. Um

00:05:02 - 00:06:01
so for these cases where you want to filter your data zone maps can help minmax indexes I'm using it interchange it bear with me. Um, so they can help but only if the data is pre-clustered because then I can quickly skip over sections of the data. But if I don't have clustering, if I don't have any correlation to sorted attributes, the zone map won't help me. And then there's also another point for the filter, which is that the data size matters. So once I'm starting to scan my

00:05:32 - 00:06:31
whole data set to find a few tupils, scans even though they're very tuned in analytics do become expensive. So that's kind of like why for filters maybe we're looking at a use case where an index is still useful. Um then there's the last point on this slide which is also yeah important to me personally is that I want to stress versatility here. If we want to think about duct DB in a production or in like a pipeline use case we cannot assume that there will only be heavy analytical queries. So

00:06:02 - 00:07:13
maybe we need to query some metadata as part of the table or maybe there's going to be some he chores or some queries that are not analytical query happening regularly in the background. So if we want to have duct DB be a versatile tool to use there we might need to think about having good index support. Um so yeah with that let's look at indexes and duct DB. So eventually it took uh some time from the very previous 2018ish state um to now but now we have primary keys we have foreign keys we have unique

00:06:37 - 00:07:41
constraints and it's also possible to add like explicit indexes I'm going to call them because you need to do the create index uh SQL to use them. Um what does that mean? That means and for any of these cases in the background duct DB adds a secondary copy of your data that it has to maintain. it has to yeah keep track of. Um yeah so that's that's what happens behind these statements. So I'm going to now talk or jump into yeah the more hands-on part I don't have a demo it's all in slides but um they

00:07:09 - 00:08:19
will be available I think so it's easy to look up the queries. Um so first to start our profiling small mini journey let's set up our table. So here I choose a very simple table. It's just a bunch of integers. um it's like 10 100 million rows and I'm having like a pseudo random thing here because we want some deterministic um behavior here. So um I'm generating like some values deterministically so we know how many duplicates we expect for our profiling. Um we can control that with the module

00:07:44 - 00:08:53
back there. And then if you look at the data we see also it's not clustered. It's like very uh yeah nclustered which kind of helps scan not being able to cheat. Um so if I talk about any index now it's always going to be this create index thing. It's not a unique index. It's just because there are duplicates. It's just a index we add to our single column we have on the table which is the ID column. Um so now because we want to look at some performance numbers one thing that we can we want to do is we

00:08:18 - 00:09:26
want to enable profiling. So maybe or probably some of you have used this explain analyze that DTDB offers where you can explain and analyze your query plan. You get like a nice output either JSON or pictureish thing. Um but you can duct DB also actually has a profiler which we are actively working on expanding which gives you a bit more metrics than the explain analyze and maybe also um makes them more usable because we can output them for some clients already directly on the connection so you can forward them to

00:08:52 - 00:09:48
some observability tool for example. So it's no long like ideally and that's something we're also working on some clients have it you can then use these JSON files and consume them some wells and get very nice observability on your system you can track the average latency of your queries you can see peak buffer memory um or even per operator if you want to pass the the JSON file you can see if you're doing for example a scan or an index probing operation or what the timings of the individual operators

00:09:20 - 00:10:29
are. Um so yeah check it out in the docs. Maya is also here today. She's also working very actively on getting cool metrics in there like how much did you read from a file and whatnot. Um so for our presentation we will be using profiling coverage all which means we want to profile every query not just select statements um and we want to have the output in JSON that's yeah here and the first thing we want to look into well how does index maintenance perform what I mean with that is let's like bulk

00:09:54 - 00:11:04
append 10k rows um oh in this case because a row is only an integer 10k integers and will look at the performance if we have no indexes on the table or we have three indexes. I just created the same index three times on that column. Um because every time we add data, of course, we want to also propagate it to the index. So yeah, it really it makes a big difference. So this is our query. We just again generate 10k rows. And we can see that no index takes 7 milliseconds. And if we have three indexes only, it's already at

00:10:29 - 00:11:31
400. Why is that? Because our indexes, they're actually not duckb can bulk append easily by just writing it to the end of the table. But for indexes, for every value, we need to go in onto our tree and need to find out where we need to add it. And at the moment, that's also not paralyzed. So a lot of work um for three indexes. So now maybe oh maybe you're going to be saying well I don't care in my workflow I have my ingestion workflow somewhere else and once it's all ingested happens at night and then

00:11:01 - 00:12:07
then during the day the data is there and I only care about select performance ingestion can take longer it's it's fine well in that case there's another thing with indexes which is index memory like once I have my indexes there and they're like up and running how much memory do they use and I'm really not making a case for indexes at the moment but um it is what it is. So we can now have a look at the index memory um by using DTB memory which is like a function that gives you different memory tags and

00:11:34 - 00:12:59
shows you how much bytes these tags consume. Um here I'm just saying I want the in-memory table tag which is giving us the memory for our now created table and the app memory tag which gives us the index memory. Um I'm also dividing it by uh 10 this thing nine which mean gives me the gigabytes sorry um English. Um so yeah let's have a look. Um we can see that our index memory is actually twice the size of our me table memory. Um which is significant. Um and that is because if we have this

00:12:16 - 00:13:18
index we have a secondary structure. So we need to co copy the entire column it's row ids and we have index metadata like the nodes of our tree. Um and also what I want to mention here is that we don't yet we buffer manage the memory so we track it but we don't have an eviction strategy yet. So if you have an index and even if you lazily load it let's say at some point you might have used a lot of it so all of that memory is active and ductb is not yet evicting it. Again, hopefully we will have this

00:12:47 - 00:13:45
fixed in some of the upcoming releases. Um, but even let's say you would have eviction in place and you could get rid of the staler or least recently used index memory. If you're having a system running with a lot of concurrency and a lot of these parts of these indexes are active for your index scans, for example, that still means that these indexes create quite some additional memory pressure on top of your queries. And then if you have a long running query, maybe you will have to benchmark

00:13:16 - 00:14:36
this. But maybe just this extra memory that is now used by the indexes can't be used for your query. So it could impact performance. Um so yeah even once we have eviction in it really has to be chosen like case by case if the index gives enough benefits. So yeah, benefits. I mean, so far not really a great thing to use, but um well, why or why would I then if I have these two situations still choose to use an index? Um that's well maybe you just can't not use it because you have integrity constraints. H okay, but let's

00:13:56 - 00:14:57
say maybe you don't need it for that. Then maybe you want to have uh you have a lot of filters and you have lot of highly selective filters. So your filters only get you like four rows out of 10 million or 100 million in these cases. Maybe if you know that that's a repeated query that happens in your system, you do want to add an index for this specific case. And then duct DB also has two um configurable settings here that I want to mention is that if you know that your system gets slower

00:14:26 - 00:15:27
once your index got starts scanning too much for example, you could decrease the maximum count. You could say, well, I I know I want to use an index for this case, but I never want to scan more than five values, maybe. So now I'm a little bit in this land of actually ending up tuning your duct TB, but I do think there are some use cases where you might end up doing that. Um, so yeah, you have these two um values to play around with. And um with that in mind, we be have seen the default value. So we're always

00:14:57 - 00:16:05
going to try to scan a data chunk. And if we have more, we stop because we think it's getting more too expensive. Um yeah, so with that in mind, let's um do a little point query here. So in our data table we created earlier, we want to scan all the values or all the rows that have this ID. And here I'm just counting then them like maybe in your use case you would be joining them to a different table and another table. We don't know. Um so if I do my uh have my profiling at this time I'm using explain

00:15:31 - 00:16:35
analyze but you would get the same output with the profiler. Um I just chose explain analyze to make it a bit more readable. We can now first of all check am I actually using my index scan because maybe you have uh added your index but duct DP chose not to. So you can first of as the first thing have a look with explain analyze at your query plans and you can see in the left side this is using a sequential scan on your table. So somehow duct db is not using your index scan that for example could

00:16:03 - 00:17:14
explain why even though you thought your query would be fast it ended up not being fast. Um, so once you have made sure that you're using an index scan, you can see it on the right side. We have a type index scan there. You can uh at least be sure you're having this uh scan in place. Um, so now next let's actually check out how much faster your index scan is going to make this point look up. And we can see here that yeah, it does matter. I mean, we're still talking about milliseconds, but let's

00:16:38 - 00:17:45
think, let's imagine the data set is even bigger. Um, so for anything that's like a few chunks, like 4,000 values, your index, uh, like you're probing, your index is going to be 1 millisecond maximum. Um, but once you're actually looking at fetching a lot of chunks, DDB starts doing a lot of extra work because you're not no longer scanning sequentially. and uh directly collecting all the values, you first have to scan the index and then you kind of have to jump around in your data to

00:17:12 - 00:18:17
find all the matching rows for that index because the index gives you the row IDs and then you still have to find them in the actual data. So that's a lot of random access instead of just scanning over it once. Um so yeah with that uh graph here we can see at least if you choose to not use any indexes maybe that's also relevant dimension you say okay I I don't care I want to scan scanning will always give you the same performance it's very predictable because you know you're always going to

00:17:44 - 00:18:56
go over the entire table independent of how many values you're actually going to fetch because you have to look at all of them. Um yeah, so maybe I at least managed to make a case for indexes in like some niche situations where they could be useful and otherwise I do want to say be careful because they can also add a lot of uh overhead to your system. Um, oh yeah, I also wanted to highlight that we still looking at a very small, even at 40,000 values, we're still looking at a very small percentage of

00:18:20 - 00:19:33
our table here. Um, so high selectivities are important. Um, maybe some final thoughts on the talk. Well, what I want to stress with my talk or what I really what I really think is important is that there's no rule of thumb if you use duct tb. Uh like there's no because we try to choose kind of the best defaults anyways. There's not an obvious you have to do this and this and this to make your system fast because ideally it's already fast. So if it's not then you really have to profile

00:18:56 - 00:20:08
and benchmark to track down which operator is slow or maybe in a concurrent scenario the combination of which queries is slow and yeah it's really benchmarking um and then what can also what I've seen really useful uh for some bigger like production systems is really good observability setup. So if you have a pipeline or anything that you can like see okay if we have this peak traffic then we see this query times go up. So hopefully with our profiler we will be able to make that more and more feasible

00:19:32 - 00:20:28
also in ductb that you can really profile relevant metrics and that you can also use this ductb memory query to regularly ask ductb hey how's my memory doing? What is being allocated at the moment? Um, so yeah, if you're interested, check out our performance guide also and the DTP configuration page. Um, yeah, and I guess that was my talk. So, thanks and cheers.