00:00:00 - 00:00:54
So, you've built a lakehouse and you're sending a lot of data to it. That's great. Your queries are running fast until they don't. Suddenly, they're starting to crawl. You're scanning millions of rows, having to look for a single user ID, and your query engine is having to open every parquet file to do it. Today, I'm going to show you how Ducklake sorted tables fixes this with one line of config, and why the order that you do things actually matters. Let's get into it.

00:00:32 - 00:01:28
I just want to start right off the bat why sorted data has an effect on the way that your queries work especially with these high cardality columns. When you look at this graphic here, you see on the left side we've got unsorted data versus assorted data on the right side. So the left side is how a lot of event data will actually work. If you've got a bunch of different users, say on your website or in an application, they're all clicking on things at different times and a lot of times the way an

00:01:00 - 00:02:03
event system works is it's sort of first in first out. So say the first user here has a page view and that happens at a certain time stamp then another user somewhere else clicks on the site and it happens just after the page view of the other user and then after that the first user has a click. The graph here sort of illustrates the way it's going to probably show up in your lakehouse and it's going to come in at time stamp. This is easy to query over when it's a small amount of data. But if you are

00:01:31 - 00:02:43
pushing millions of rows daily and maybe even less than that, you're going to have a lot of unsorted data in your parquets. Now, that's going to potentially cause some real problems if you need a user ID specifically and you want the sequences of the events that that user did in a certain time range. And the reason for that is because in lakehouses, the data is stored in parquet files and paret files have min max statistics in their footers and this is what a lakehouse uses to decide what

00:02:07 - 00:03:13
it is it needs. Okay, so if a user is using an application one day and then a week later they come in and start using the application again, well that data could end up in one, two, three, maybe even four different parques and potentially all of your parques depending on how they use the application. What that does is that's going to be a really big inefficiency down the road because you want to reduce the amount of parquet files that your lakehouse scans and the reason for that is it's just a bottleneck and it's

00:02:40 - 00:03:44
rather unnecessary to read every single parquet file that is being stored in your lakehouse. What would be better is if you could have fewer files where certain data that should be close to each other is. That way you can actually skip some of these other files. So when you see the sorted parquet data on the right, it's going to have the user ids from 1,00 to 299 and the second parquet is having user ids 300 to 499. You compare that to the left side with the unsorted where all the user IDs are

00:03:13 - 00:04:16
being represented in both the parquet files. So sorting can really matter here, not just at the way that it's set up in your table, but also from a a logistics standpoint for a lakehouse architecture. Parket files also have what's called row groups in them. And not a lot of people talk about this stuff, but this is where something referred to as predicate pushdown comes into play. So you can see here this is a very highle mental model but what I've shown is you've got a query that's being

00:03:44 - 00:04:42
sent through the query engine and the planner for the query engine is going to look at all the files and let's say the parquets are sorted and it's going to say hey I only need to read this file so it's going to go there first and skip this that's an optimization right in the beginning and then it's going to look at all the rows in the table that it opens up from that parquet file and the sorted data in that parquet file is going to be sorted in row groups as well. So in this

00:04:12 - 00:05:20
higher model we see that row group one is going to have another user user 2047 and we can skip that row group. We don't need that. Whereas uh user 101 let's say we're looking for user 10001 here is all in row group zero. So we can keep just row group zero. This is able to all be read very quickly. But being able to just skip what you don't need really really helps on the margins and it really helps when you have very large tables that you're trying to do a sort by for example. So if you didn't have

00:04:46 - 00:05:44
this data sorted, you can imagine kind of what it would need to do. It would need to read through potentially thousands of paret files. It would need to read through all of the row groups and all of those paret files. You compare that to maybe it only needs to read one file and then maybe it only needs to get one row group. it's able to cut all that fat off at the top and just get what it needs. This is a very very useful optimization for lakehouses. So, I told you that Duck Lake has a particular way that it approaches this

00:05:15 - 00:06:10
sorting problem and it's meant to kind of create a click it and forget it sort of experience for you. So, you don't have to think about having to always sort this stuff down the road. Especially if you create a table initially and data starts streaming in and we'll say say your traffic just spikes and suddenly your volume just goes crazy. The queries that you had running that were just fine with small amounts of data. They still can keep that performance going and you're not going to be worried about you know

00:05:43 - 00:06:42
basically a 2 a.m. text saying that something crashed overnight with your pipelines. We are going to look at a substack that I created which I will link to in the description where I have quite a bit of code walking through how sorted and unsorted data is going to look in Ducklake. So let's start here. Uh we're going to create an unsorted DuckLake table and I'm going to have cursor open for this one and I'm going to start an instance of DuckDB. Um, as normal, you're going to want to install

00:06:11 - 00:07:15
or load Duck Lake. And I will just for purposes of the video, load DuckLake here. And then I'm going to attach a catalog. And we're going to call this sorted duct DB. And it's going to be in a data folder path. You can see over here my DuctTB database has been created. And right a headlog has also been created. We're going to use ducklake and that's going to now allow us to not have to write my ducklake every single time. So it's going to be a nice alias and then we're going to create a table

00:06:44 - 00:07:47
in here. This is going to be an unsorted table up front. That's how it works when you create a table. But we've got a user ID which is a variable character event name variable character and then a ts for a time stamp. So we're going to keep it like that. Then from there, we're going to insert data into that table. Now, let's look at this data real quick. So, you can see here, we're going to insert a user ID, and it's set up like that, similar to the tables that I showed you in the

00:07:16 - 00:08:06
graphics, but it's unsorted just like the unsorted uh data was that we kind of went through. And it's going to have event names in it, and then these timestamps. The timestamps are in an order. So the use case we have here is you know events are coming in from different users on your application but they're going to be stored at the timestamp sequence because that's normally how things work with events. Something that was created first gets into the lakehouse first. It doesn't

00:07:41 - 00:08:40
necessarily group itself next to the same user ID. So we've got a few user IDs in here and we're going to insert them. Okay. Over here you can see we now have a data folder. I do like to just bring this up which is you don't see any parques in the data folder yet. And the reason for that is because the number of rows we inserted is below the inlining threshold that Ducklake has. If you're not familiar with inlining, I've got a video on that and an article which I will have in the description. But the

00:08:10 - 00:09:22
takeaway is that Ducklake has a default internal threshold for number of rows per insert. And if it is below 10 then it will just keep that data stored in the metadata catalog in the database. If it's above 10 then it will actually write it to a parquet. This is 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10. So equal to or less than the threshold. It's going to be inlined. It's going to be uh stored in the metadata catalog. So we won't see a parquet yet. We will a little later down the road. All right. So you've got

00:08:46 - 00:09:47
unsorted data now in a table. Let's just do events for a sanity check. We can see here we've got a table in our duck lake. And hey, that's great. We could query this. It's going to run really, really fast. This is a small amount of data, but for example purposes, you know, that's what we're doing. Okay, so now let's get to altering the table to add a sort order. So when we first initially created the table there was no sort order added which is why when we inserted data and then we viewed it

00:09:17 - 00:10:36
everything was still unsorted. We can now use the alter table command uh a very common SQL command but there is a set sorted by uh which is ducklike specifically and what we're going to do is we're going to set the sort order by user ID first and then timestamp ascending. So, it's going to take that data. It's going to reorder it first by the user ID and then the timestamp in ascending order. Let's add that. Okay. And then now let's insert five more rows to our Ducklake table here.

00:09:56 - 00:11:16
And you'll see that this data is also uh unordered in the same way from our first insert. But now if we go and look at the events table, let's peek at this because this is a really really good way to understand what's happening with ducklakes sorted tables. The first 10 rows in this table 1 2 3 4 5 6 7 8 9 10 they are unordered as you can see. But the next round the additional five rows we added those are ordered. the 10001 uh 3892 4731 those are all distinct with one row but that last user 5618

00:10:36 - 00:11:42
they're now ordered by the ascending order of the user ID and then within those users the ascending order of the time stamps. So here you can see in 5618 it goes from 134129 to 134131. What's happening here? Well sort order is not retroactive. So if you start putting a bunch of data unsorted into your ducklike table and then you add a sort order, it's only going to affect all the data after that. And this is a big reason why, you know, it's important upfront to think, I think, very

00:11:10 - 00:12:01
carefully about what you want the table to achieve. Today's video is sponsored by Motherduck. Motherduck is a data warehouse built on top of DuckDB. And if you are thinking about trying to deploy a duck lake into production, you're going to want to check these guys out. If you're not familiar with mother duck, I suggest you come to the homepage and just look it up real quick. They call themselves infrastructure for answers. So yeah, they're a warehouse, but they're a little bit more than that.

00:11:35 - 00:12:35
They answer the question around DuckDB's single node process by having this concept of hypertendency, which allows for multiple users using DuckDB in a warehouse setting. That's very cool. They have their own MCP server. Get out of here. Who's it for? It's for software engineers. It's for data scientists, for data engineers, content creators. And yes, they do data warehousing. But they also do customerf facing analytics. It also has plenty of scale. It starts out with this small pulse. You can move

00:12:05 - 00:12:59
to standard after that. Then you got jumbo. Then we're getting even bigger to mega for this large stuff. And then there's this thing called giga. And I don't know. I'm probably never going to have that much data, but it's cool. It also has an MCP server which you can connect directly with an LM and it'll spit out a bunch of code that they call dives. These dives become analytical interfaces that you can actually then host inside Motherduck. That is incredibly cool people. I hope you go

00:12:32 - 00:13:30
and check them out. Motherduck's a fantastic platform. Thanks for watching. Let's get back to the conversation. So ordering it in this way, it answers a number of user centric analytic questions. I think you need to pick your top bucket and you move down from there. Just a general purpose. It's going to be a little bit different per table. But in this situation, yes, we'd like to have the user IDs ordered and then we want the sequential timestamps for each of those users. Let's go back and create a

00:13:01 - 00:14:07
sorted table now so you can see exactly how that looks. Uh note that if you do set a sort for your table, you can actually reset it by just having the uh alter table events sorted by. So that's a really nice thing that Douglas's also offering because you may end up actually setting the wrong sort order and you really really want to, you know, bring that back. And so this is a really nice easy way to do that. Great. So now let's create a sorted ducklake in table. We're going to drop that old table. get my CLI

00:13:34 - 00:14:35
cleared up. So, we're going to drop the events and then we're going to recreate the table again. Now, instead of inserting data at this point, what we're going to do is we're now going to add the alter table, the the order config. Okay, now we've done that. So, now we've created a table and then we've set the sort order. sort order by default when you set it like this is going to affect inserts your flushing to parquet and then your compaction on parques. We're going to

00:14:06 - 00:15:20
show that soon but I just want you to realize that. So if we insert data at this point so we're going to insert the same data we did last time but the difference is is we have already set the sort order at this point. There we are. We've inserted it. Now let's read from that table again. And here voila you can see now the data is sorted. So now it's going from the user uh in an ascending fashion. So one 01 is first but it's it's relocating all of those users next to each other. And

00:14:43 - 00:15:45
then within that it is sequentially ordering the time stamps in ascending order as well. So now we have clean nice data coming in at the insert right off the bat. And that is just immediately going to allow you to not have to think about this part in your query. There's going to be no order by say in your initial CTE or maybe you need to run a view on top of this or you need to take a materialized uh table out of this so you can get a sorted version of it. This happens all the time. It's usually a

00:15:14 - 00:16:08
workaround for unsorted tables. But Ducklake's making it incredibly easy with one line, one config is allowing you to set it up right here. So every insert moving forward, voila, it is just done. It is good to go and you don't got to worry about that. You can just go off and start querying. Again, like I talked, you know, when we do these inserts, if it's 10 or less, which is the default threshold for duck lake, there's no parquet that's being created. So we haven't quite, you know, been able

00:15:41 - 00:16:43
to see uh the optimization of skipping files that I had talked about. All we're seeing right now is the way that ducklakes feature affects the order of a table. This data has all been inlined and we can tell by looking at the files uh in Ducklake itself. So I will actually grab that and there's a specific function you can call from Duck Lake called Ducklake list files. And when we run that you can see there are zero files. There are no files created yet. Files means parquet files. So no

00:16:12 - 00:17:19
files yet. One thing we can do right now though is we can see the metadata for the sort that we created. Ducklake has a lot of metadata tables. They're very detailed and they're rather normalized and you can get a lot of really cool information about what you're doing in your Duck Lake from these tables. So, you can actually view from the metadata ducklake sort expression table and we put the metadata prefix onto here. When we run that, you see here that we've got uh the sort order here.

00:16:46 - 00:17:43
So, it it explains it to us. All right. So there was a sort uh ID on this first table that we created and then there was also a second one here as well. You get this history of what you also did in your sort orders which I think is just very cool and from an observability standpoint like if you wanted to know did someone change something did they reset it like we showed this table's going to be able to show you that. Now the table doesn't have the table name in it just has the table ID but we can

00:17:15 - 00:18:23
bring in the table name from another metadata table. So we do that here. We're going to join the duck lake sort expression table and we're also going to just join the duck lake table and that's going to give us a table name. So you can see here now we've got the events table name. Just right off the bat, like this is just really proving out Duck Lake's observability, which is not even in scope of this video, but you can see using metadata, you know, you can get an idea of exactly who did what on what

00:17:49 - 00:18:45
tables with this metadata in Duck Lake, and I just think that's incredibly powerful. It's one of my favorite parts about Duck Lake. I get super excited about it. Um, maybe too much. Moving on. Okay, so at this point, I've explained why setting the sorting order at the top is really helpful. And we've got data now inlined. Okay. But one thing I told you if you remember is that when you set a sword order, it affects the inserts, which I showed you. But it also affects flushing and it affects compaction.

00:18:16 - 00:19:10
Flushing in ducklake really just means you're writing the inline rows that you have that are saved in your metadata catalog to a parquet file. You're going to flush it. So all the inline rows are going to be removed from the metadata catalog, which in this instance is just duct DB, and it's going to be written to a parquet file. But the sort order if set will actually sort that data as well if it isn't already. Here we're just going to flush the inline data we already have which is sorted. And I'm

00:18:44 - 00:19:46
just going to show you what that looks like. We're going to call the ducklake flushed inline function. Let's clear that up and run it. And you can see here that there were 10 rows flushed from the events table in the main schema. And now to your left in the browser, we see a parquet file has finally been created. We didn't have one leading up to this point because all the inserts we did was below the threshold to write a parquet by duck lake. But when you flush, it's going to take all

00:19:14 - 00:20:25
those 10 rows that we inlined and it's going to now flush them for that table into a parquet file. So we now have a file that ducklake is going to be reading from. And if we just go from events again, you can see nothing has changed. The data in the inline rows are no longer there. But we have a parquet to read from now. And just like that, it is still good to go. If we read from that same list files again, the function we ran before, you'll see now there is a file on record and there it is. So

00:19:49 - 00:20:54
before zero, now one. And that's going to explain a lot to us in the future of what we are going to do with something like compaction if we have multiple other parquet files written. One of the cool things that I had just recently learned is that you can actually view the parquet statistics with ductb which I think is really cool. This isn't even ducklake specific. It's something duct DB allows, but it's really convenient in Duck Lake because when you look at the statistics of a parquet as we do here,

00:20:22 - 00:21:23
it gives you an idea of exactly how the parquets probably should be ordered and sorted and just how convenient the sort order is for your parquets. So looking at the parket we just created, we can see that the min max of the user IDs is from 101 to 4731. That was all the data that we had, right? And there is a single row group so far. It's a small amount of data. So that makes sense. Uh just at zero. So the row group is at zero. And these are the minmax statistics. So you can get idea thinking

00:20:53 - 00:21:49
from the original graphics I showed you about, hey, here's how this parquet is set up. And if there was a user above 4731 that we needed and it wasn't in this, we'd end up skipping this file and we'd go look for the next one using the statistics. That's what the query uh engine planner is going to do. I just wanted to show that cuz I think it's really really cool. Okay, we've got inline sorted data flushed. We've got nothing else currently inlined. We're going to bring in some new data, but

00:21:21 - 00:22:20
what I want to do here is I want to show that you have a couple options with your sort config in Duck Lake, which is going to be really convenient. One of the things you can do is you can turn off the sort on the insert. Why would you want to turn the sort off on inserting tables? The reason is there is overhead to sorting data when it's being inserted. And it does make sense to do that at maybe a batch level if you're putting a lot of data in all at once. But if you're sending a single event to

00:21:51 - 00:23:05
your lakehouse and it's just a particular event that someone did, it might make more sense to turn off the sort on the insert so that it just goes in unsorted and then you can worry about either ordering it later or flushing it to parquet when it will get sorted. So you can actually turn off the uh sort on insert here. And you do that by calling the my duck lake set options. So we're going to do that. Great. So we have success. So right now if we flush the data for the events table, it's going to order. If we do

00:22:27 - 00:23:45
compaction on the events parquet files, it's going to order. But if we do another insert, it shouldn't order. I'm going to show that. Insert data again. Another five rows. We'll look at the events table again. Great. So you can see here we added another five rows onto the 10 that we did. Those first 10 were are ordered in the way that we initially set them up which are in a parquet right now. But the next five are not ordered. So you can see it's user ID 3892 and then user 10001. So those are not ordered. So

00:23:08 - 00:24:03
we've turned off the insert ordering. However, we have not turned off the order at the flush or the compaction. Also double checking we've still only got one file. So we are reading from both inline data and from the paret at the same time. So Ducklake will do all this in the background for you. You don't have to worry about saying, "Hey, I want to read both of this." It's just going to look for inline data and for paret data. And it's blazing fast as you can see. Okay, great. So what we're

00:23:36 - 00:24:50
going to do now is we're going to flush the inline data again. Now, right now, like I said, the inline data is not ordered, but when we flush it, you can see the five rows have been flushed and we've created a second file here, another parquet file. And if we go back to reading that table, what we see here in the table is we have that first insert of those 10, those are ordered correctly. And now the second insert that was put into the table is also ordered by user ID. and then also by time stamp that is already in a better

00:24:13 - 00:25:14
spot. We allowed this data to come in unordered but when we flushed a parquet now it is ordered at that parquet in that parquet when we read from the table duck legs grabbing both those parquets putting them together and then giving us the output. Just a reminder when you do turn off the sorting for the inserts it's still going to be sorted when flushed. However, you noticed the whole table wasn't actually sorted together was it? It was just sorted basically by parquet. Let's look at the statistics

00:24:42 - 00:25:56
for those parquets. Great. So here we've got different events now for our parquets and they're being represented in two different ones, but we've still got row group ID is happening for all of them. Uh but you can see the column orders. There's two rounds of it. So this is representing the first parquet and then this column is representing the second parquet and that becomes very clear in the user statistics. So this has 1001 to 4731 and the second parquet has 101 to 5618. Right now, if you were just to query for

00:25:22 - 00:26:27
user 5618, the query engine would know, hey, I can skip this first parquet because that user is not in that parquet and it would then go to just this one. And then it would go to road group zero uh because the other row groups wouldn't have 5618 in it in this current form. That's a big optimization in real time you can see there of what's happening with Duck Lake and Lakeouses at large. But Ducklake specifically really does a nice job. Its sorted tables really offer a clear way to understand it and their metadata

00:25:55 - 00:27:00
tables they give you the observability on it. So it's just a big win. So finally you've got ordered parquets together but as we saw when we read the tables it's not all ordered together. It would be nice to have all that in order as one just less to do downstream. Douglake can do compaction and it does it through its checkpoint statement. Compaction is when you take multiple parques and you condense them into a smaller amount of parquets. In this situation, we have two parquets. It's

00:26:27 - 00:27:34
going to turn it into one. Let's clear this and let's run it. Success. You can see over here again in our file browser, we've got a new parquet file that was just created. Let me read from events again though and let's see what we've got. Great. So all of the data now both of both of the initial inserts everything is being represented as ordered in one table. We've got everything from 101 to 5618 all showing up in one table. All right. So what's happening here? I'm

00:27:01 - 00:28:01
going to show you the files list again. Clear up my CLI again and run it. So you see here when we run the ducklake list files, it's only showing one. It's only showing one. And what's happening here is ducklake is still doing a lot of the work for you. So the ducklake list files function is going to go through the snapshots that are stored in Ducklake's metadata and it's going to say what files do I need to pay attention to? What files are actually created that are being used for this table? And this is

00:27:30 - 00:28:32
the latest one. These other two are now old files. They're essentially orphaned. They're not being used anymore when we read from that table. They've been compacted into a new one, but they don't necessarily get removed. But we can also just do them manually right now to show you using a particular function. Let's clean this up. And the name of this function is ducklake cleanup old files. We're going to put it over our ducklake. So this is at the ducklake level. Okay, it's going to look through all the old

00:28:02 - 00:29:05
files. And again, these are files that are not being used anymore when we're reading from the data. We run that and you'll see now two files were removed. That's the output. And if we look over at our folder now, we see there is only one file left. And so we have cleaned up those old files. And now that new compacted file with our wonderfully sorted data is ready to be queried. And finally, let's look at the minmax statistics again for that parquet. So we can see now there's just one file in

00:28:33 - 00:29:41
there. There's one round of column ids and it is for users 101 to user 5618. So all of that data is being represented now in a compacted file. And once again if we read from it we can see it's all ordered just how we like it and at scale. This is setting you up for success for your high cardality queries down the road to not crawl and not eventually get error outs and memory limits. that's saving you time, money, and most of all headache and sleep. So you don't have to worry about this kind

00:29:07 - 00:30:04
of stuff. Everyone, I hope you enjoyed this video. If you did, please like and subscribe. If you were running into this sorting issue, I hope this video offered something for you to have a sneak peek into what you could do from an optimization level or it showed that Duck Lake is actually the type of lakehouse architecture that you would like to start to build and create in your own company. Lakeouses are a wonderful design, a wonderful architecture, and I love being able to talk about them. But thanks everyone for

00:29:42 - 00:29:45
watching and as always have a great