00:00:03 - 00:02:04
A kubernetes or something I don't know. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Ah. >> Joe Reis: What's up? Here we go, so. Welcome everybody to the Practical data lunch and learn. This time last year. Good friend harness. Woolheisen, uh, gave a talk on Duck Lake, and now. Uh, he's got something new in store for you. This is announced, um, a Council, a couple weeks ago and? We're going to talk about clock, and lastly, something new, actually. So, um, honest, take it away. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Excellent

00:00:33 - 00:02:06
day. Thanks for the invitation. We're really happy to be here. Uh, and, uh. Yeah, it's. It's been interesting so two weeks ago. Uh, we were in San Francisco, and uh, we talked about clock, and um, I'm, I can give you. I can give you the first sort of reactions as well. It's, uh. But before I do, I kind of want to go, maybe a bit about, like, show you a bit, been showing at AI console as a as a sort of motivation to? What I've been showing at AI Council as a as a sort of motivation to

00:00:56 - 00:03:02
because I think it's a good idea to start with that, and then my plan was to do a like an extended demo, something that I wouldn't dare to do on stage. But here in the lovely I feel a bit more. I feel a bit emboldened, let's say, like, I know, that the internet's gonna work. So, that's, uh, so that's what you're gonna do. So, let me just, um, let me just start with my. slides here. And yeah, please feel free to interrupt me. Ask questions in the chat. Uh, I'm gonna try to. Watch

00:01:26 - 00:03:28
the. Uh, I'm just kind of try to watch the. The screen. But actually, I think this, this is this beautiful. What I'm not entirely sure what I'm gonna do here should have prepared this prepared this better. I think I might just share this the the the window, and then you're just gonna. See my slides like that? Uh, and then. Hide presented notes, so you don't see my rants. That's that's what I'm gonna do. Okay, can you see this window it? Click the can you see this?

00:02:11 - 00:03:51
Yeah. Can you see this great? Okay, so okay, perfect. I'm gonna make it a little bit bigger, and then I hope that you can still see it. Yes. Okay. >> Joe Reis: Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: great. Um, so let's maybe we start about I, I presume you have heard of ductib, uh, it's a, of course. Universal data running tool runs everywhere, including. On your sort of neighbors. I don't know battery. Uh, Dr B has kind of kind of been absolutely excellent at running on a single computer,

00:02:48 - 00:04:41
right? Like, you have your database. It's on one computer. It's great It works really well over the years. We've added a bunch of stuff so. uh, I don't know if you're aware, but Dr B can actually talk to a bunch of other like postgres. I like my sequel. Like, actually, anything that has an odbc driver. So that really works. No problem, so you can have database living somewhere somewhere else. You talk to it from Dr DB. We accidentally made. I think one of the best postgres clients, so

00:03:15 - 00:05:28
it's actually the it's. It's one these winter, funny things that happens sometimes here. We've also had this, uh, thing where we have a? Integration with object Store. So, like, S3, like? Azure, like Google things you can store your parquet files on objects, so that works really well, right? So, that's all great. However, you cannot. Talk to another deck TV and that was kind of by Design, I think. When we started Dr DB, and I'm gonna talk about this later in a bit more. We kind of really

00:03:52 - 00:05:15
were very, very felt very strong about the single node in process architecture because. it simplified a huge amount of things. Like, if you have single note, you don't have to manage a cluster. That's great. And if you have an in process architecture, you don't have to manage a server like a server process or a docker container, or God knows what on that machine either, so that's really great. But the consequence was that, like, it's really not so, trivial to talk from one in process database to

00:04:15 - 00:06:11
another in process database, things. Like, you have to do some things and we kind of didn't do it on But then, we realized we're just looking at the Internet, like, here is a bunch of GitHubs of people, basically Implementing a way of duct DB talking to Dr B more generally for. Something outside of the process to talk to ductivity, and there's this is just for examples. I think the Gizmo made be one of the better known ones, and so there's just been so many. Yeah, Repose popping

00:04:49 - 00:06:49
up that we were, like, okay, we probably have to do something about that, right? It's just it's just a bit. It's just a bit problematic if you see. Like, if you architectural decisions are being second guessed by everybody out there, then you have to kind of maybe come back to your architectural decisions, um, and one use case. I want to highlight is this? Basically, what is it called a observability use case where you have to say you a bunch of nodes? And they do something they measure something or they

00:05:19 - 00:07:05
just collect logs or. They maybe they're running somewhere out in the field, and they collect Telemetry for you, and you just want to centralize all the information you want to have a central authoritative. Way of skipping that data, um, that is a use case that ductibi couldn't just do, right now and? And that was something that kept people from from, like we couldn't solve some people's problems with, like to be. And again, you know, like, we are not there out there to be right. From an academic

00:05:46 - 00:07:42
perspective, we try to. Solve people's data problems and, and so that this was one of the examples where. We just couldn't. We couldn't help so. We had to reconsider it as well. Our Pride. And, uh, obviously, if you wonder where the name came about the the ways that Ducks talk to each other is by quacking, and so it had to. It's clear that if we have, we make something that makes Ducks talk to each other. It had to be And that is what clock is is a? A way of ductibi instances to talk to each other

00:06:21 - 00:08:47
to talk to each other on the same computer to talk to each other over the networks they talk to each other over, you know, between planets, who knows? It is really. It is really. Uh, pretty straightforward. So Dr B is a yeah. If you want a database client server protocol? And that is specific to directly can be, uh, basically. do that or more can talk to each other a bit more on that later. So, how does this look like? Um, here's an example. So here, on the left side, we have two data be instances. This one is green,

00:06:57 - 00:09:12
one is blue. He's again can be different processes or different computers or planets. On one hand, you say, hey, I want to. I want to serve start serving this database that I'm in. Using Quark. Once you call Quack serve, which is basically just starts and and internal built-in server. And then let's say on the green side on the left you created table. And then. On the right side. What you can do is, you can attach this database. And um? Then you can start querying it. For example, you can directly use

00:07:30 - 00:09:27
our implicit magic to sorry for the for the autocorrect, a little squiggly lines, but um. You can implicitly query a table there by saying, from remote full, so inductibly the select Stars optional. So this means the same as select star, or you can say from remote.query from who, and that will just explicitly allow you to specify query. Let's then run on the other side and the result is shipped back to you So that's that's fairly straightforward and actually. When I presented this at AI Council, we still had

00:08:01 - 00:09:52
some sort of previously things to deal with. But since the duct to be released, 153? That happened last week. All of this just works magically out of the box because quark is implemented as a ductibi extension. We have many extensions, but the quack is one of them, and it will basically automatically install once you start using it, so that's really elegant. You don't have to do anything. Um. How does quark work internally? Uh, it's it's we have, you know, we have spent some time thinking

00:08:29 - 00:10:13
about this, We also had the opportunity to learn from other people, uh, that that we're doing this. So, on the bottom is TCPip. That's totally shocking. We need a network protocol. We're not going to invent a new one, although that would be very much abduct to be style. If you, if you thought about it, we could just invent on on network protocol. And uh, you know, screw everybody in the process. No, it's just TCP and then on top of that, it's https HTTP. So that is a bit more

00:08:56 - 00:11:02
controversial, We forgets had some comments on Hacker news about this. You know how how you would ever dare to make any sort of powerful protocol based on http? uh, the simple truth is, this is a great choice, uh, because dactdb runs. Also in the browser, and if I having and the browser can only speak HTTP. So, by A cork based on HTTP, you can actually talk to to adapt to be server from a which is very elegant. It's also this fun fact that all the infrastructure out there is actually optimized for making

00:09:32 - 00:11:06
HTTP fast. Um, every firewall knows it, you know, every every single, the security people know it. It's not something that's going to pop up in your firewall. Log is the first time you try clock, so that's a good thing. And so it's basically built on top of HTTP. In our simple get response request, response scheme, not so crazy. And on top of that. Becomes, it's somewhat even somewhat more controversial. If you think about it, Like, you say, okay. Now, how do you actually encode

00:09:55 - 00:11:37
the structure of these messages, because the message just need to contain complicated things like data types and tables and queries and all that stuff. So, wouldn't you just use Arrow for that? And we made a conscious. We thought about it at length, and we made a conscious decision to not use Arrow for our internal protocol for quack, but to use something that DB has any way, which is called a serializer, which is a internal facility inductibility that already existed to basically serialize

00:10:28 - 00:11:52
So, we use that to to basically turn multi-dimensional objects into a signal. Dimensional data stream, which kind of required in order to shove this in an HTTP message. And on top of that, it's really a simple protocol. Like, you can send a message and the messages there's like four different messages. There's a message to, hey, I want to connect to this server. Hey, I want to send a query. And hey, I want to fetch results? It's kind of it, right? It's really not. It's really not

00:10:53 - 00:12:16
crazy. don't, uh, want to deal with a lot of complexity there. We don't want to deal with a lot of complexity there, so that's really very basic design of of quark. We have to look at some some orbit complicated issues, so the first one is We have been living in a very blessed world so far, where, uh, we didn't have deal with authentication because ductivity wasn't in process database and basically the if you control. If you have access to this process, you can do whatever you

00:11:18 - 00:13:03
want in a process, so that was really not a lot of point to do. Authentication, inductively because you cannot really defend against a client that sits in the same process, right? They can look at your memory and do whatever so, we but now, with quark, we have to actually deal with this, and this is such end as well of complexity that we have. You know, we've tried to deflect a bit of it and we have actually made use of our ecosystem. For that as well, because while Dr quack ships with a very basic token based

00:11:45 - 00:13:24
authentication, it's basically just like three. You have the token as you can you can come in. You can actually override this from an extension. So, if you have, like your crazy covers based authentication that you know your your 80 year old CTO and cysts on, then you can basically override the basic core authentication with your own thing. Have your own extension that ships you authentication method and you're done. So, that's actually quite elegant. In my opinion, is that you, you

00:12:14 - 00:14:17
just can do your own thing? You can even write a SQL function. In SQL to do authentication, like a lot of, read a file and check with the I allowed to do something. It's kind of cool. It gets more complicated for authorizations authorization. Like, you know who gets to do what? Like, that's another in endless well-off complexity in in databases and a similarly right now, we just don't do any of that, but we allow you to overwrite this. So, if you have a crazy, you know, authentic authorization scheme where you

00:12:45 - 00:14:16
want to, I don't know, have, like, row level access control based on some crazy criteria again, you know, in correspondence with the authentication, you can just do that by just plugging a function that looks at the query that can remember the protocol and say yes or no based on that they can even rewrite rewrite the queries, so that's also kind of cool. You can rewrite these queries that come in in the authorization function. So, for stuff like that. So that's really flexible, and at the same

00:13:12 - 00:14:47
time, we didn't have to implement, like the destinative version of this. Thing. So that's kind of how Quark looks like. I'm gonna show you much more later in in the demo. I just wanted to show you some experiments before we go there from. For, uh, for what we see performance wise so? I have to admit something that many years ago, I am. Mark and I wrote a paper how terrible database client protocols were, and this was very true. And in this plot here on this page on this first page of this paper.

00:13:50 - 00:15:29
You can see how basically all the database protocols were at least 10x worse than netcard, which is really just copying the bytes over to the socket, which should be. Uh, it's very much eatable by a competent database protocol, but nobody managed Everybody was at least 100x versus was even 1200x. No, so, 20 time expert 20x, worse than than netcat in this experiment. So I was in this wonderful position where I had to sort of, you know, go back and now design a database client protocol that wouldn't suffer

00:14:20 - 00:16:09
from this. So, we tried. So, for this experiment, we just have two computers. One is client one is the server. They're both. They both run in Amazon. Ec2 and they are in the same available available availability Zone, so they're just like normal sized servers and what we do, is we, we have two experiments, is just bulk transfer, raw transfer of Rose, and one is. Like a small transactions. That's more like to like this observability case. I showed you some time ago. So, let's look

00:14:52 - 00:17:08
at the first one. So here I have an experiment where on the x-axis I just crank up the number of rows and I crank them up quite quite far. So, this is cranking up to. 16. 60 million rows, so that's a big test data set, and you can see that. So quad managed this in something like four seconds and error. Flight took seconds, and postgres was somewhere else. I just have to look at these numbers up one second before I say something wrong. Where was this again? There we go, so. Uh, Arrow, 20 seconds, postgres

00:15:32 - 00:16:59
3 minutes. There we go. That's, uh, that's, uh, that's quite a big difference. And that's kind of makes sense, because, of course, poscess hasn't changed their protocol even since we wrote his paper, and they just have a huge amount of overhead. Quack is really blowing everything away, and it's kind of should be because we optimize it, of course, for being good at bulk transfer. What surprises a bit is that. We also did so much better narrow flight, and and there's some in

00:15:53 - 00:17:38
some some interesting technical reasons for that. But the biggest surprise that we was what we had was when looking at transactions. So obviously, when you think about it, if you now have a protocol, It's good at transfer. It's probably not so good at doing small things like small inserts like inserting a single row. So, in the second Benchmark that we did, which is basically had the same setup with two computers, and we, we just had a stream of inserts, and we increased the number of. Parallel processes that we're

00:16:22 - 00:17:46
doing the inserts, and you can see the. The results. So we have the the threads go up on the x-axis and the transactions per second go up on the y-axis. Obviously here, higher is better, and we can see that we actually managed to outperform quark with eight power. I perform on a transactional case with eight parallel threads, which. Obviously here higher is better, and we can see that we actually managed to outperform quark with eight power upperform postgres, even even that horse would be better at

00:16:47 - 00:18:23
this use case, and then a protocol is really designed for Our flight being really, really, really designed for bullet transfer did, did not, not very well here, but again. We, we also managed to outperform it in debug transfer case so that that that really well. It's very happy about that. So, what is, what does it mean, like? Now we have client server protocol for attack DB called quark. So, what can we do with this? The simplest thing you can do now, and that was, that wasn't possible before. Is

00:17:18 - 00:18:59
you can have like a client and a server, and to talk to them by a clock and this goes both ways. Obviously, you can. You can pull a large amount of data from the server. You can push a large amount of data to the server, and it's really for these cases where you know you. Maybe duck Lake is a bit too heavy. And you just want to centralize a in a data and an authorities place, maybe Sons of small transactions you can actually use. Clock. For that, maybe tuck to be on two different machines. You could also

00:17:47 - 00:19:31
Imagine something crazier, where you say, oh, because it's all just stuck to be right. You can say, oh, I'm gonna actually talk to a coordinator and then maybe have a round drop-in of queries or some some sharding of data that lives on and I'm going to actually talk to them also. Vice versa. Using Quark, you can imagine tons of stuff. So here at duct to be? We have learned that that people build much, much crazier thing than you can imagine when you when you just build infrastructure. You just

00:18:12 - 00:20:00
build pieces that people can do stuff with. And, uh, and yeah, so that's that's fascinating. But, like, in the more sort of higher level. I think, what's interesting if we look back at this like oldp versus the perennial OLTV versus all up debate? And we just look at that in three different. The time frames first is yesterday, so first yesterday or before we announced clock, maybe last year should be here now. Um, it was pretty Everybody knew that, you know, for postgres. You should,

00:18:44 - 00:20:27
for oiltp transactions, you should use postgres and for analytics. Maybe you should use something like Dak DB? But we argue. Actually, that's not true, because if you, if you yesterday, what, actually was true that you had really good? Transactional databases like tiger Beetle, and you had really good analytical databases like that to B and postgres was more like in the middle, uh, General purpose transaction processing people call it sometimes. Where? It's pretty. It's good at pretty much nothing but like,

00:19:11 - 00:21:05
okay, at a bunch of use cases, so it's still useful. So that's that's kind of what the situation yesterday was before we published clock. So now, we argue that with, you know? you know? Also with the experiments that I just showed you, um. Ductdp actually moves much more into the middle into into general purpose. Territory, where ductivity is just useful for a bunch more use cases because it now has this. Client server capability. And yeah, and who knows what? What's going to happen tomorrow? So

00:19:41 - 00:22:38
that's of course, slightly cheeky. So, that's um. That's. Uh, in a nutshell, what clock is about and? Now, I am going to. go, uh, for a demo, but first, I wanted to check in with you. If there are any questions? Tomorrow postgres GPT. What is that? Are there any questions so far that? That we we should answer. Before we go to the demo. I'll just make. The what is called? Jeopardy, waiting music. >> Ramona C. Truta: I want to ask you a question Hans. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Is?

00:20:30 - 00:21:56
>> Ramona C. Truta: Do you think that the fact that you outperform postgres even on the transactions? Is it due to the fact that you could you started from scratch and you benefit it from all the learnings and everything you know. All the improvements throughout time, so they are carrying some dot anybody, right, Anybody who's started building 20, 30 years ago, our carrying that so they cannot redesign everything. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah. >> Ramona C. Truta: Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: you're

00:20:55 - 00:22:50
yeah, I think. I think that's a great question, and you are absolutely right. Uh, the, um. The post protocol, which I have spent on this amount of time with with Wireshark at some point in my life. Has a bunch of words. For example, for the for the it for some reason transfers the schema for every row in a result set over the wire. You would argue the schema doesn't change between rows because it's fixed in the, you know, it's decided once for the result set and then just return, but that it has to

00:21:26 - 00:23:26
do with phosphorus is roots as an object or in a databases forget about that, uh, but that, of course, is a huge overhead for, um. For, uh? For postgres in the bullet transfer case, which is why it's so hopeless there For the transactional case, I actually looked at it a bit. It isn't that obvious why we managed to outperform it, but um. I'm wasn't gonna complain, uh, but you're absolutely right. The, uh, designing a protocol? Now gives you a lot of hindsight, right? Like, people

00:21:57 - 00:23:41
have not. People generally don't touch these protocols. We had this huge advantage of starting on green field 2026, kind of okay. What? What would you do today, and uh yeah, they talked to the to the mother duck folks about this, uh? Because they have a client protocol that they built. Like, I don't know, four years ago. And they could tell us like what they regretted, and we were, like, aha, you know? let's not do that. Um, not that it's, you know, in any way like, this is not, it's not, it's not.

00:22:30 - 00:24:29
It's not fundamentally different, but it's just like you, you have a lot of, you know, freedom to when you design something from I think I think that worked really well in this case. Yeah. Yeah, thanks for the question. I see some other questions here. As a general hygi, Jenna, um. The. Uh, unlocks that I'm excited about. Yeah, so I think I think that, uh. Uh, again, I have no idea what people gonna build with it. It's actually been exciting to see for the last two weeks, while people have been building

00:22:59 - 00:24:36
already So, for example, there is not already like four or five six different clients for quark from languages that are completely independent of ductivity, which I was, like, hey, we know, we thought about this wonderful thing where these both the client and server, and then you don't have to really deal with. And then we it. And then we just deal with the fact that Dr B runs everywhere that. Uh of. Rely on that fact so that we don't have to provide a client for, say, JavaScript, or something, right? Because you

00:23:27 - 00:25:21
can just use duct to be, but somebody said not. It's not good they just built a standalone client for and a bunch of stuff have been popping up, uh, I'm in the last two weeks. It's always excited, exciting to see. what? What people actually do with this kind of things you build. And again, it's kind of something we have learned now that you just build, like in useful of infrastructure and people build. Pretty crazy things with it. But the unlock that I, I think, the unlock that I'm going to excited about is

00:23:56 - 00:26:03
going to show you in a bit, which is. Uh is, uh, Doug TV as a remote catalog server for duckling. So, what I'm going to show you that that's actually working already? Um. And, uh, next question was, Andrew, do? The performance gains also apply to external tables. I mean, it depends on how fast you can read those external tables, right? So, for example, if you productivity behind in front of a postgorous server and then you talk to that ductibly instance from another dog from another duckdb instance.

00:24:32 - 00:26:22
Uh, then you're kind of limited to how fast actually can reach from that postcode server. Or if you put it behind a ductivity in front of, like, uh, I don't know, an S3 bucket and let's say your network is slow. Well, we cannot There's no magic. We cannot really, um. Beat the i o behind Doug TB, but if you are running on a fast? SSD, for example, and you're not running crazy queries, then you would usually be bound by the client side, um. I o bandwidth. So that's, that's a good place to

00:24:59 - 00:27:01
be. That's a good way to be bounded. We actually do. Uh, use. Our ductivity internal, uh, column compressions on this on the on the clock protocol wire, which helps quite a lot in. For example, not transferring constant vectors that have a million times the same value. It's just, you know, once. So, that's, uh, so I kind of depends on how fast you can read external external tables. Um. With the speed of next question. Hi Dan, um? Within speed of transactions is best to use quark. Ductibi catalog.

00:25:31 - 00:27:13
Instead of streaming and duck Lake instead of phosphorus, yes? I think in general, it is a great idea to use Quark and ductivity as a catalog server for Duck Lake, because Duck Lake also there was a blog post about this this some time ago. That, like, also has this wonderful inlining feature, and we actually ran into limitations with phosphorus. Uh, so inlining means that we, we buffer rows in the catalog, instead of going straight to K files. And that's really great for small inserts, but we were running into

00:26:00 - 00:28:12
limitations of phosphorus with that already. And so, uh, so we are. Um, yeah. So, we are, we are, yeah. So, that's actually, I think that's a, a pattern that I, I do recommend looking into so. Uh, any other questions? Oh yeah, that was my field. Ah, yes, I, but I don't. I don't know what, yeah, sorry, sorry. Tune I, I've joke. I'm very sorry about that. So, I'm going to show you a demo. And because I'm gonna do this end-to-end, I'm just gonna hide any incriminating evidence on my

00:26:37 - 00:28:43
screen. And then, I'm gonna share my entire. Yeah, you know, who know, who knows, you know? What if you see? If you see my calendar or something that can't that can't work? Okay, I think I have have. I think I have gotten everything out of the way. Yes, okay, so I'm just gonna share my screen and you're gonna take you along with me on this. Um, on this demo, that is, is a bit, uh, yeah, entire screen. There we go. Can you see my screen? Yes, can you see my screen? Okay, great! Uh, so here, um,

00:27:14 - 00:29:13
I'm gonna start really like low level. This is um. Hello Joe, this is just a Amazon ec2 instance that I'm just gonna launch. And because? I'm this is just an empty instance, so I'm just gonna also demo Amazon's. Amazon's. Setup speed. So, okay, so it's just created this empty instance. It uses the default like super boring Ubuntu, with nothing on it. Okay, so here's just running. Obviously, I hope you don't. Not going to log into my? Into my into this machine, but I don't

00:27:48 - 00:30:04
think you can so. Can you read this? Yeah, all right, so I've just copied the um. The. The very? New. Here. So this is up zero minutes, so this is just created, right? So I just wanted to show off a little bit because it's it's with software, sometimes people forget how easy it is to get dark to be installed. So this is just an just an empty box, nothing on it. There's no duct to be on it. So, what I'm gonna do is going to do curl install.tp.org. And then, yeah, so now I have Dr B

00:28:28 - 00:31:03
that was already it, right? I mean, I it's so fast, I can, even it's like, it's already running. So, now, I I have to experience, okay. Select 42 wonderful. So now, I want to get this. I want to use this ec2 box as a server for my cork thing. So, what do I do? Well, you remember? I should use cork. Serve right? And um? A clock serve. And then we have to. Oh, I think this is it? Yes, and it's gonna yell at me. Because I don't want you to actually bind two zero zero zero. But I'm just gonna override this for

00:29:15 - 00:31:06
the demo. I want to say something about something about this because we have talked about this and. A bit, the um. Um, Quark is meant to be served over https, however. The cork server. If you use it externally, however, the Cock server itself doesn't use it doesn't speak https. Do we have a whole guide on the website on how to serve this properly, where you have a reverse proxy like engine X that will terminate the SSL connection and do a reverse proxy to the coax server server that runs locally. You

00:29:47 - 00:32:34
should generally not find it to to any interface. Uh, with um. Uh, without setting that up. There's a whole guide on the website, uh, I recommend you to look at that, but for this demo, I'm just gonna I'm just gonna use this, and so now. Um, I think I still have to. I still have to open the Let me just open that port. Where was this again? So now I have to. I think I have. I think it's here. To open the sport. No. Sorry, so anybody knows how this works? Sorry, I should have prepared

00:30:27 - 00:33:14
this better. No, damn it. Security. I think it was here. Yes, perfect. Found it. I have to open the part up again. You shouldn't be doing this when you. When you um? Actually run this, so I'm just gonna add 94.94. That's our default Port. By the way, 9594. And my IP. This should work so. Okay, so now you cannot connect to this, but I can. So let me try this now. So, I'm just gonna make this small this thing and create a new terminal window with my local Direcdb and. Now, I can just basically say call from

00:31:18 - 00:34:13
Quark query, and now I have to give it a. A host name, which I have. On my Amazon instance. So, it's here. Clock this. And then disable. So screw. Whatever, what am I forgetting? I think the token. Oh yeah, I don't have a token it. So I need, of course. mentioned, I have authentication. As I mentioned, I have authentication and I to set this up, so I'm just gonna copy this token here. From. The from here, so it's just generated a token for me. Automatically that I can use now, so this is again, so this

00:32:08 - 00:35:11
should work. Hey, it worked. So this is, uh. You know, this is the from scratch from zero, including clicking around on Amazon for for five minutes. Demo of setting up for now. I have this thing. Okay, so now I have a. A um? A lovely. A lovely thing here where I can basically. Run queries remotely, so I'm gonna show you how this works because I'm just just gonna on this server. Cable. Hello. And then I'm just gonna say the string. And then I'm going to insert into this table. Hello, I'm server. Now,

00:32:54 - 00:35:15
I cannot do that. By the way, this works. So this was the server against, and I'm closing it again. And then I can say say, here, I actually select from. Hello! And say hello, I'm a server, and that just went over the wire to the server the server Amazon and and that that is great. So I can read stuff that's over there. This is a bit clunky. Like, I don't want to every time. Do this, like, quack, query with the whole thing. So, ductibi has this facility called attach so I can do something like this where I

00:33:28 - 00:36:08
can say, hey, attach? This. And then I think I have to provide token as well. And again. I think this should work. Yes, and so now I can do something like. Remote hello, and it will also just give me the, uh, this connection. Add this this table, so that's that's. I can also do something like this. Where, say, into remote.hello. Values. I know. Hello, I'm the client. Oops, and now if I read this table again, then amazingly the the data will have added to this table. So basically, you

00:34:18 - 00:36:27
can. You can can go both ways, and I think what's kind of interesting. So, now, this is just running locally on my MacBook here, so I business is going over the Internet so I can also use this To just want to run random query. From select 42. And now, let's just try to stress this a little bit. You know, I'm just gonna to show you. I'm just going to switch the timer on. And then I can do something like, I don't know from range. Actually, let me just replicate the experiment we

00:34:49 - 00:37:20
just did in the in the in the thing because I can just I can just load GPCH. We have, like, a oh yeah, sorry. I have to install it. Oh yeah, sorry, I have to install it first Benchmark data set with? Our DB and? I can just create a couple of million of rows of demo data on this on this ec2 machine. Using the? Super big footage line item table. There you go, that is done now, so I can do let's say, select count. Star from line item. And it's going to be 6 million. Okay, so let's just start pulling rows here

00:35:28 - 00:37:24
line item. I don't know. Limit 10, 000. And this should this just finished over the Internet from Amsterdam from my office to us East. One one's across the Atlantic in, like two seconds, so that's that's pretty good for 10, 000 rows. Sorry, that was 100, 000 draws. Oh, let's make it a million one million rows, so I guess this will take 20 seconds. Oh no, four seconds. How is this possible? So the um? One cool thing about clock and the implementation inductee is that it auto? also

00:36:04 - 00:38:21
parallelizes. The retrieval of rows. So, that means, and it does, like, fairly bulky, can do fairly bulky transfers. So, in his attack, if it detects your result is going to be big. We actually spawn a bunch of threads that, in parallel, pull the result which actually hides this fairly big latency between me and the, um. The the Box actually. Let me see what the latency is. The box in US East one? Oh yeah, of course. I can't ping it. Stupid Fireballs anyways, um? So, that's, that's. That's, like, very basic

00:36:39 - 00:38:45
clock operations. Let me just look at my, uh. Yeah, okay, did this? So, now I want to show you something else, which is, uh, the reveal that I you Joe. And I've already hinted at it. So, if you think about how duct Lake Works and Duck Lake, we have this catalog server. And with quark. For the first time, we can actually use duct DB as a remote catalog server. So far, we you could induct like you can pick which character you want. But if it was remote, it always had to be something like postgres in the past and

00:37:18 - 00:40:07
that covers anoid us because you know, I mean, why? We don't hate phosphorus. We think that it has. There are some improvements possible. Perhaps so um. Let me just show you that so. Um, hang on. How do I do this again clear? How do I clear the cells here? Oh my God. I don't know anything about, um. Clear all outputs. There we go. Okay, so I have a. I have a. Policy called a call up notebook here. I'm just gonna make this a slightly And basically what this does. It's demoing the Duck Lake with

00:38:02 - 00:40:04
the duck with server. So, first in this in this and notebook, I will have to install the latest duck is very simple because you can just say. Pip install Dark DB. And it will, because for some reason, collab doesn't update attack TV version. It's still on 132, and I just mentioned you need 153 so. Now, it's installed, and what I'm going to do. Now, here is, you will be very surprised to see that I'm gonna call Quack. Serve on it, so I'm gonna start a server process here.

00:38:34 - 00:40:31
Um. Um, that's basically, uh, yeah, just running now in this process. So, obviously, keeps you from running. Cork within the same computer, or even the same process. By the way, this is something that, uh Pedro, uh, from our team has shown together, which is why token is his dog's name. And, uh, and now, what we can do is is actually quite elegant, so we can again, We can attach this. Quark, but we actually attaching it through duct leg. And if you, if you know how dark Lake Works, you know, that induct

00:39:06 - 00:41:14
Lake you have this Dark Lake prefix and then after that you say where you catalog lives. And now you just say I want duck leg, and I want clock, and it should be running on this in some this case. And then I'm gonna have I have a new duct leg and then I can just use it and insert a table instance and so on. So forth. So now you can just do that. And Create a duck leg instance that, yeah, again. Uses the cork server that's running in the. Yeah, in the, uh, in this thing and? And yeah, and now I can

00:39:42 - 00:41:44
run and I can reach like I can do things like. That time travel and things like that, and that should also work in my in the other demo. So, if I go back to the other demo, hang on. So, I'm here. I'm on the client now, right? And I've just attached this. I should. I am not going to do it now because I will still sample some questions, but actually, I'm feeling I'm feeling a bit. I'm feeling a bit. I'm feeling it excited. I put them at the moment, so let's if this works. No, it doesn't

00:40:15 - 00:43:16
work, but I can make this work one second. Because I have to provide a secret here first. And I can do that. Okay, and of course this is not client SQL. This is just directly SQL. And now, let me try this again. Does this work? Probably not. Uh. never mind. This is something I still have to make working, but you get you get the idea. So the I will stop sharing my screen and I will. Be come back here. There we go. Yeah, so. So, it's um. Yeah, so basically, that's, that's the demo. So, duck Lake basically

00:41:08 - 00:42:53
from scratch, started up easy to server startup, a server connected to it, run random queries. It is really, it is really not difficult. Um, you have to think a bit about whether, how you get a set up the encryption, the tokens, obviously, That's always a thing when you set a client server, but I hope to show you that this is not difficult. Yeah, I already have a question here, so I'm gonna answer that first, and then hopefully there will be more questions. So, Jose. What are some of the

00:41:38 - 00:43:29
things, if any, that had to fundamentally change with inductive in order to be able to now handle concurrent reads, right? So, that's a great question, um. The. Ductibi itself always has been able to handle concurrent, read writes, However, you had to be in the same process. And there were some restrictions. For example, we couldn't, uh, handle concurrent rights while a checkpoint is running. So, for those of you who don't know what the checkpoint is? The way database is to fall. Tolerance

00:42:10 - 00:43:56
traditionally is the changes that you made are written to a journal file called a writer headlock. They have always did, forced to disk, and then if a crash happens it, you know, the database file can basically be recovered and made consistent into the last committed State. By reading this journal file, that kind of avoids you having to rewrite the database file every single time you commit, which is, by the way, way, what SQL light does. It's not efficient. So, ductibi has had this thing where, if, during, and sorry,

00:42:39 - 00:44:27
and checkpointing is the process of basically, eventually cleaning up that journal file because you don't want that Journal file to grow till the end of time. So, at some some point, you have to. Fold all the changes that are on the journal pack into the main database file that's called checkpoint. We used to have this restriction that we couldn't commit while checkpointing, but Mark. Has recently worked on this, and now the activity can do. It is so the in process version of ductibi has is

00:43:06 - 00:45:14
capable has for a long time being capable of things. We have improved it recently. Otherwise for quark to work. Um, nothing really fundamentally had to change inductibly. In fact, I don't fact, I don't think. Committed any change to duct DB as part of the implementation of quarks or So, quark is, as I mentioned, is implemented as an extension. And that is, uh? That is just an extension, so I didn't actually have to change Kodak to be, of course, benefits from a lot of work that went into

00:43:38 - 00:45:29
productivity recently to make it more efficient for concurrent access. But yeah, it is a bit of a it's always has been a bit confusing, which is also part of the reason to build this thing in the in the first place. Uh, cool. Thanks, um. Another question from then, uh, what's the best way to do high availability for Darkly catalog? If you use ductivity, quark instead of proscars with postgres CDC. It's natural, but quack is just Cork server and replica. Yeah, you can do that, um? But the cool thing is about

00:44:08 - 00:45:45
quack. It runs over HTTP. You can do all the funny games you do the HTTP on on clock. If you want to do a failover or a load balancing or anything like that, that already works because you can just do that via. Quark served over nginx or something like that, right? One thing that we haven't done yet and that we want to add to quark. It's planned for the future. Is that you can do ship the journal entries to a secular standby replica overcock as well. And actually, we already have all the infrastructure in place

00:44:36 - 00:46:00
because our journal also uses the serializer, and so we can actually use all these all these components that we already have to ship these log entries to a secondary a secondary replica, and then you would have a. All these components that we already have to ship these log entries to a secondary replica, and then you would have high again. The cool, I think one of the nice. Again, the cool, I think, one of the nice things neat things about cork is that it's built on HTTP, so you know people operations. People know

00:44:58 - 00:46:47
how to do funny things or things like, you know, operations on HTTP things that expose HTTP, and that that all of these things will continue to work on on Cork, which is which, I think, is a really key factor of making it not weird to manage. Like, if you want to have a pause first protocol proxy, you are like riding a bunch of code, right? Like, you are If you want to have a clock proxies like, great, you already have one, you know, I don't just do it. So, I hope that that answers the question. Other

00:45:28 - 00:47:19
questions. >> Joe Reis: Yeah, one question I have and something we, uh, United, About a couple weeks a couple weeks ago. One thing that comes to mind with this is a possibility of. fleets of quacker.db or distributed. I'm Dr DB. How would that work exactly because I think to me that seems pretty >> Hannes Mühleisen: Uh, what exactly you mean distributed deck to be, or or what did you? How is that? >> Joe Reis: Well, I mean this having, yeah, I mean, basically. Well, we can talk about the

00:45:58 - 00:47:22
fleet. It's how different the descent or distributed, but um, just. I mean, WB is sort of multiple DBS talking to each other. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah, yeah. >> Joe Reis: All over the place. >> Hannes Mühleisen: yeah, no, I think I think that's exciting. Um, it's not something that we've, um. Been working on yet, but it's, uh. >> Joe Reis: Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: But it's, it definitely unlocks a a possibility. I mean, I had a slide about it, Like, I'd say

00:46:20 - 00:48:13
you have. You can have a coordinator that in turn speaks to other ductivity instances, the the tricky bit there is is you have to deal with the deal with the um. Uh, the, um. Splitting up the tasks, or like, it's if you wanted to have truly scared out, you would have to deal with the splitting your task, which is one of the. um, let's say one of the big sort of challenges I would say in databases. Like, you could spend 10 20 years on. There's no problem at all, um. But it is definitely, uh, it's definitely

00:46:47 - 00:48:19
possible. I think something that that I would maybe find interesting is to say, I'm gonna, for example, I have gonna have replicas like, somebody said, and I'm gonna have a load balancing over a bunch of replicas. Like, I think that would be super exciting. exciting. >> Joe Reis: Right? >> Hannes Mühleisen: I that I think I think that is. That is the immediate sort of use case I can see for for connecting many computers with, uh, with clock and again, you know, Like, if you want to do if you, let's

00:47:14 - 00:48:45
say, you just want to Union the results of a bunch of? Uh, duct TV instance together like that works like you, you have your attached these, uh, secondary second level nodes to to the to a to a centralized, uh coordinator, and you just query ended in Union it, and it's all duct to be. It's also something I forgot to mention that it's because in quark, both the client and the server are ductivity. You can do query processing in both ends Another thing anybody has really done that yet. Like, normally, if you

00:47:38 - 00:49:18
have a database client, it is dumb. It can run a send a query up and receive result and that's it. It can maybe write them to a file or something like that, but it is otherwise very dumb. With clock, you have actually be running client-side, so if you want to do re-aggregation, or you know, filtering, or I don't know what of this result that you just pulled down from the server? Great, you know, like? That is, that is, that is something that's pretty unique, I think, uh, from a data architecture

00:48:03 - 00:49:42
perspective. Joe. But yeah, the Holy Grail, yeah of. Like, fully, you know, endless scaling, like, that's, that's maybe future work. But uh, tune had a question. I think I wanted to. I wanted to answer this it's really cool. Um, so he's gotta ask about all auth support. How do you pronounce this actually all off who came up with? >> Joe Reis: Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: this word? Does somebody made a word that you cannot pronounce nice? Um, but look, somebody just wrote

00:48:30 - 00:50:08
clock over Earth extension that you can use exactly. So, this is, this is the beauty of of community, of course. So, somebody made an extension that can override the clock authentication to use all off. And, um. And that is, that is the beauty of this, right. You make something fluggable and people build all sorts of crazy. Things. And yeah, so now you can use this extension if you want to use auth. So that's that's really cool to see. Yeah, I think I may have seen a seen it seen it briefly. Yeah, I don't

00:48:59 - 00:50:29
know. >> Joe Reis: They're German nearly honestly. Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: I must know about it then. >> Joe Reis: Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah, we. Anyways. Uh, yeah, so that's that's really cool to see, um, but uh. Uh, yeah, so you can. You can write, write this kind of authentication extensions. You can wear authorization extensions. They are thinking about making the protocol itself plugable so you can register new message types if you want. Like, there's a bunch

00:49:27 - 00:51:05
of interesting things we are. We are planning to do, uh, also client-side. We're planning a new statement so you can actually explicitly forward all the queries to remote side things like that. And any other questions? Or Joe. I don't wanna. Hijack. >> Joe Reis: Well, I mean, what's uh, what are you excited about with clock? It seems to have caught on, um. I can't remember you sort of slide with the number of downloads of, uh. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah. >> Joe Reis: What it was

00:49:54 - 00:51:42
something about AI council with number of downloads of? Duct Lake extension and something else if I thought. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, I had to slide that showed like people duck leg was just launched a year ago, right, and, and it's already. The second place between Iceberg. Duck Lake and Delta. In our extension download, it's like we have three million Iceberg downloads roughly and 2.5 million duck Lake downloads and 2.3 million. Delta downloads, so it's already like duck Lake

00:50:20 - 00:52:17
in a year has already become a thing with people betting the farm on it. There's already. Like, there's already been announcement from a company called Firebolt that they are gonna replace lots of their, uh, internal structures with duct Lake, for that just happened. Like, I think yesterday. You can have already said, oh, somebody has already made a quark plus stuck leg posted on cloudflare project, which is, which is, uh, which is all, yeah, it's. It's really fun to see and. Um, I really cannot

00:50:49 - 00:52:20
keep up with all of that. Uh, which is a, which is a lovely problem to have, but, uh, yeah, I'm sorry if forgot somebody's project, but but. I just I just see something's flying by, and I'm like, okay, cool. Yeah. >> Joe Reis: It's the the popularity of duck Lake, though, right? Because I think the the common consensus is iceberg is so that default, but if you look at the numbers numbers, actually, I think it paints a different picture. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah, I

00:51:14 - 00:52:37
think. >> Joe Reis: Joe. >> Hannes Mühleisen: we've managed to establish ourselves somewhere in this space, which is, which is very cool. And with clock. >> Joe Reis: What's so? >> Hannes Mühleisen: I think I think I think walk. I will also. I would also be, you know, maybe quark will will also inspire changes in some other projects, I think that would be would be very fun to see, and we see it sometimes that. You know, we make a design, and then maybe they don't take it over in me,

00:51:37 - 00:53:13
like, as is. I just copy the code or date, but they say effectively do the same thing, I think that would be really cool to see as well. Like, in the end, I I care data Systems better, uh, if it's whether it's my code or not, it's great. Yeah. >> Joe Reis: Yeah, what's I guess? Let's, uh, can you say anything about what's coming up up with quack duckdb, Duck Labs, Etc? >> Hannes Mühleisen: Uh, what's coming up? Uh, yeah, yeah, I think. >> Joe Reis: You guys need a

00:52:08 - 00:53:44
logo for ducklobs. That was cool, but uh. >> Hannes Mühleisen: We, yeah. Today, today we changed our. We changed our email addresses. Like, that is a terrifying thing. Uh, in Google and Google, uh, Google, Google apps for business, by the way it works. I was actually impressed in case anyone is trying, but, uh, what's coming up? Well, I just told you the the thing that, you know, Peter, just hack with a week ago, which is this. Clock as a catalog server for ductivity by the clock as a

00:52:32 - 00:54:13
catalog server for duct Lake. I think that's really exciting, uh, we have duct db2.0 coming up in So, that's also gonna be a big, big changes coming there. For example, like we're doing async IO on Dr DB finally. Uh, we're we are gonna ship a whole new parser inductees, so we're gonna have have extensible syntax. That's gonna, that's gonna be. That's exciting. That's, that's something that, just was finished. Uh, no, it's not finished, got sort of close

00:53:02 - 00:54:39
enough to finishing that very comfort of putting it into release. There is. Uh, things around extension API that we're shipping. There's there's a, there's a bunch and bunch a bunch of stuff. And, uh, yeah, I also again, even in our in our small company. I don't, I don't exactly know what every every last person is is cooking up at the moment. So, yeah. Now, that's really cool. >> Joe Reis: That's super cool. It's awesome, um, quite any other questions, probably, uh,

00:53:30 - 00:54:52
cut out. >> Hannes Mühleisen: This was quick. I thought this isn't feel like an hour. >> Joe Reis: We have. No, actually, I want to check out the peer-to-peer data showering abilities of a clock. I think that that could be really interesting for data teams, so. >> Ramona C. Truta: I'm gonna ask something. uh, my, and I don't want to put hands on the on the spot. So, obviously, you're eating someone or someone's lunch with this. Yes. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Uh, no, I,

00:54:00 - 00:55:42
I would disagree with that. I think that is a. >> Ramona C. Truta: Yeah. >> Hannes Mühleisen: a I don't. That is a very. It's a very I. I think this is a VCS. Always talk about the oxygen, right? And I, I disagree. I think the the data Market is is the data space. Uh, is huge, and it's growing. And so you can grow without eating somebody else's lunch. It's not a problem, Maybe you're not. You're not taking over the world, uh, or, you know, become become the

00:54:29 - 00:56:11
Oracle, uh, and that's fine. It's not really what we are, what we're aiming at. Uh, but I, I would say, eating some of these lunch now, maybe? Unlocking things that didn't work before. That's the way I like to look at it, Like, we make things possible. Like, with Dr bb, we put analytical query processing in places where nobody had a thought about putting it like there's people out there that run Dr B on like batteries. And again. That's, that's something that would. You

00:54:57 - 00:56:40
couldn't have run a spark on that thing, and I think and we're not again, and we're not taking away from any spark deployment which just we just. Expanding possibilities, uh oh, unlocking more spaces. And I think that's also what what cork is about? And yeah, so I don't. I don't really see the eating lunch things so much as I see unlocking possibilities. >> Ramona C. Truta: Okay, so not purposely. But when you unlocked out, you give people a choice, so >> Hannes Mühleisen: Sure.

00:55:28 - 00:56:59
>> Ramona C. Truta: it's. So now! >> Hannes Mühleisen: Of course. >> Ramona C. Truta: I didn't mean it that intentionally, you're doing that, and you, you were very clear throughout the talk that that's not your purpose. You just want to improve the, uh, dbms period. Okay. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah, pretty much. I like databases. What can? >> Joe Reis: Yeah. >> Ramona C. Truta: Thank you very much. >> Joe Reis: It's fashion, but no, as I was thinking about it,

00:55:57 - 00:57:22
though, and I think it unlocks actually a lot of, um, things that maybe weren't, uh, as readily available before, like data matches have been banning about for a long time decentralized something that would be one of the unlocks for. That's really would be one of the unlocks for that. To really make it work. Um, truly, because I think, um. Yeah, when I start your Jupiter notebook because, like, oh s*** data teams, could totally use this, uh, behind the scenes, and um, share data. Without having like SFTP shed or

00:56:20 - 00:57:25
send it over email. So, um, actually, a huge, >> Hannes Mühleisen: Yeah. >> Joe Reis: huge possibilities. So anyway. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Very. >> Joe Reis: That's been around, um? Honest. Thank you very much, you know? This was a bit of a spur of the moment thing. I'm glad we're on. That's what you're a great basis for. We just can do these things, and uh, some. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Excellent. Yeah, thank you. So, thanks so much for your invite. And

00:56:35 - 00:57:22
thanks, everybody. For the questions, really enjoy them. >> Joe Reis: Yeah. Awesome! Well, thanks, and this will be upon, uh, YouTube, as well. So, I'm sure the link, but yeah, thanks again. >> Hannes Mühleisen: Thank you! Thank you, Joe. >> Ramona C. Truta: Thank you.